Docs: React multi-root guide (#16252)
ckeditor/ckeditor5: docs/installation/integrations/react-multiroot.md

---
menu-title: Multi-root integration
meta-title: React rich text editor component | CKEditor 5 documentation
category: react
order: 20
---

{@snippet installation/integrations/framework-integration}

# React rich text multi-root editor hook

<p>
	<a href="https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ckeditor/ckeditor5-react" target="_blank" rel="noopener">
		<img src="https://badge.fury.io/js/%40ckeditor%2Fckeditor5-react.svg" alt="npm version" loading="lazy">
	</a>
</p>

CKEditor&nbsp;5 consists of {@link installation/getting-started/predefined-builds ready-to-use editor builds} and {@link framework/index CKEditor&nbsp;5 Framework} upon which the builds are based.

The easiest way to use multi-root CKEditor&nbsp;5 in your React application is by using the {@link installation/getting-started/predefined-builds#multi-root-editor multi-root rich text editor build}.

<info-box hint>
	The multi-root editors in React is supported since version 6.2.0 of this package.

	Unlike the {@link installation/integrations/react default integration}, in the multi-root editor we prepared the integration based on the hooks and new React mechanisms.
</info-box>

## Quick start

> This guide assumes you already have a React project. If you want to create a new one, you can use the [`create-react-app`](https://create-react-app.dev/) CLI. It allows you to create and customize your project with templates. For example, you can set up your project with TypeScript support.

Reviewer: CRA is deprecated and discouraged right now, let's not treat it as a blocker but we will need to fix it.

---
menu-title: Multi-root integration
meta-title: React rich text editor component | CKEditor 5 documentation
category: react
order: 20
---

{@snippet installation/integrations/framework-integration}

# React rich text multi-root editor hook

<p>
	<a href="https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ckeditor/ckeditor5-react" target="_blank" rel="noopener">
		<img src="https://badge.fury.io/js/%40ckeditor%2Fckeditor5-react.svg" alt="npm version" loading="lazy">
	</a>
</p>

CKEditor&nbsp;5 consists of {@link installation/getting-started/predefined-builds ready-to-use editor builds} and {@link framework/index CKEditor&nbsp;5 Framework} upon which the builds are based.

> The easiest way to use multi-root CKEditor&nbsp;5 in your React application is by using the {@link installation/getting-started/predefined-builds#multi-root-editor multi-root rich text editor build}. You can also use a customized editor built by using [CKEditor&nbsp;5 online builder](https://ckeditor.com/ckeditor-5/online-builder/) in any React application.

Reviewer 2: We don't have multi-root in the online builder.

Reviewer 2: This whole intro seems confusing / unnecessary. I take it that it is a copy-paste from another guide, but maybe let's think if it makes sense here. Why the user should read it? What info the user gets from it? Do we want to redirect the user or show they a better/different approach?

This is a guide for a specific, multi-root integration. I'd assume that the user knows what they are doing if they are here. It may make more sense to give here some hint that this is for multi-root editor that supports multiple editable areas. If they are looking for a classic integration, they should look at the regular React integration. This will help people who get here straight from Google, for example.

Author: Wonder how will we do it with the New Installation Methods...

This guide assumes you already have a React project. If you want to create a new one, you can use the [`create-react-app`](https://create-react-app.dev/) CLI. It allows you to create and customize your project with templates. For example, you can set up your project with TypeScript support.

Install the [CKEditor&nbsp;5 WYSIWYG editor package for React](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ckeditor/ckeditor5-react) and the {@link installation/getting-started/predefined-builds#multi-root-editor multi-root editor build}. Assuming that you picked [`@ckeditor/ckeditor5-build-multi-root`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ckeditor/ckeditor5-build-multi-root):

```bash
npm install --save @ckeditor/ckeditor5-react @ckeditor/ckeditor5-build-multi-root
```

Use the `useMultiRootEditor` hook inside your project:

```tsx
// App.jsx / App.tsx

import React from 'react';
import { useMultiRootEditor } from '@ckeditor/ckeditor5-react';
import MultiRootEditor from '@ckeditor/ckeditor5-build-multi-root';

const App = () => {
	const editorProps = {
		editor: MultiRootEditor,
		data: {
			intro: '<h1>React multi-root editor</h1>',
			content: '<p>Hello from CKEditor&nbsp;5 multi-root!</p>'
		},
		config: {

> 			// your config

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
			// Your editor config.
```

Make sure that the user does not confuse it with maybe some kind of React integration config, and they look for a correct thing.

Author: In commit.

		}
	};

	const {
		editor, toolbarElement, editableElements,
		data, setData,
		attributes, setAttributes
	} = useMultiRootEditor( editorProps );

> 

Reviewer 2: Double empty line here.

Author: In commit.

	return (
		<div className="App">
			<h2>Using CKEditor&nbsp;5 multi-root build in React</h2>

			{ toolbarElement }

			{ editableElements }
		</div>
	);
}

export default App;
```

## Hook properties

The `useMultiRootEditor` hook supports the following properties:

> * `editor` (required) &ndash; The {@link module:editor-multi-root/multirooteditor~MultiRootEditor `MultiRootEditor`} constructor to use.

Reviewer 2: Not sure how we call it in the other places. Maybe we should call it build, not constructor? Just a thought. If we call it constructor somewhere else, then fine.

Author: Same notice, we'll be dropping the idea of "builds" pretty soon. We tend to call them "presets" in the new approach, but it varies.

Reviewer 3: I copied it from the React default integration docs, so I would stay with it for consistency's sake.

* `data` &ndash; The initial data for the created editor. See the {@link installation/getting-started/getting-and-setting-data Getting and setting data} guide.
* `rootsAttributes` &ndash; The initial roots attributes for the created editor.
* `config` &ndash; The editor configuration. See the {@link installation/getting-started/configuration Configuration} guide.

> * `disabled` &ndash; A Boolean value. The {@link module:editor-multi-root/multirooteditor~MultiRootEditor `MultiRootEditor`} is being switched to read-only mode if the property is set to `true`.

Reviewer 2: Could we follow following convention for all parameters of this list?

```javascript
disabled: Boolean
config: EditorConfig
```

etc? WDYT?

Reviewer 2: Instaed of "A Boolean value".

* `disableWatchdog` &ndash; A Boolean value. If set to `true`, {@link features/watchdog the watchdog feature} will be disabled. It is set to `false` by default.
* `watchdogConfig` &ndash; {@link module:watchdog/watchdog~WatchdogConfig Configuration object} for the [watchdog feature](https://ckeditor.com/docs/ckeditor5/latest/features/watchdog.html).
* `isLayoutReady` &ndash; A property that delays the editor creation when set to `false`. It starts the initialization of the multi-root editor when sets to `true`. Useful when the CKEditor&nbsp;5 annotations or a presence list are used.
* `disableTwoWayDataBinding` &ndash; Allows disabling the two-way data binding mechanism between the editor state and `data` object. The default value is false.

> * `onReady` &ndash; A function called when the editor is ready with an {@link module:editor-multi-root/multirooteditor~MultiRootEditor `MultiRootEditor`} instance. This callback is also called after the reinitialization of the component if an error occurred.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `onReady` &ndash; A function called when the editor is ready with a {@link module:editor-multi-root/multirooteditor~MultiRootEditor `MultiRootEditor`} instance. This callback is also called after the reinitialization of the component if an error occurred.
```

* `editableElements` &ndash; An array of `ReactElements` that describes the editor's roots. This array is updated after detaching an existing root or adding a new root.
* `data` &ndash; The current state of the editor's data. It is updated after each editor update. Note that you should not use it if you disabled two-way binding by passing the `disableTwoWayDataBinding` property.
* `setData` &ndash; The function used for updating the editor's data.
* `attributes` &ndash; The current state of the editor's attributes. It is updated after each editor attributes update. Note that you should not use it if you disabled two-way binding by passing the `disableTwoWayDataBinding` property.
* `setAttributes` &ndash; The function used for updating the editor's attributes.

## Context feature

The `useMultiRootEditor` hook also supports the {@link features/context-and-collaboration-features context feature}, as described in the main {@link installation/integrations/react#context-feature React integration} guide.

However, as the multi-root editor addresses most use cases of the context feature, consider if you need to employ it.

## Two-way data binding

> By default, the two-way data binding is enabled. It means that every change done in the editor is automatically applied in the `data` object returned from `useMultiEditorHook`. Additionally, if you want to change or set data in the editor, you do not need to use the editor API, instead, the hook provides the `setData` method. It works the same way in case of attributes &ndash; the hook provides the `attributes` object and the `setAttributes` method to update them. It ensures that if you want to use or save the state of the editor, these objects are always up-to-date.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, the two-way data binding is enabled. It means that every change done in the editor is automatically applied in the `data` object returned from `useMultiEditorHook`. Additionally, if you want to change or set data in the editor, you can simply use `setData` method provided by the hook. It works the same way in case of attributes &ndash; the hook provides the `attributes` object and the `setAttributes` method to update them. It ensures that if you want to use or save the state of the editor, these objects are always up-to-date.
```
